the Bahamas introduction
because of its geography smuggling has
been part of the Bahamian economy
throughout its history the Bahamas is a
chain of 700 coral islands of which just
29 are inhabited the Bahamian
archipelagos stretches 750 miles from
Cuba and Hispaniola to just 40 miles off
the southeast coast of Florida in the
years after world war ii the development
of the Bahamian economy focused on
tourism while a group of British
businessmen known locally as the Bay
Street boys
controlled most aspects of the local
economy the bay street boys represented
gambling interests as well as the
merchant class in 1967 a more broadly
based Bahamian party the progressive
liberals party PLP led by lyndon
pendulum took power within a year of its
1973 independence from britain but hey
mian law enforcement authorities were
warning that drug trafficking was a
serious problem and by 1979 that problem
was a crisis in the late 1970s both the
narcotics smuggling and government
corruption in the Bahamas grew at an
extraordinary rate initially marijuana
was the principal narcotics smuggled
through the Bahamas but cocaine became
an increasingly significant factor in
the early 1980s as of 1988 the Bahamas
remained a major transit country for
both drugs with 50 to 60 percent of all
the cocaine and marijuana entering the
u.s. transiting through Bahamian
territory witness after witness
appearing before the subcommittee
testified to using one or another
Bahamian island to drop drugs for
transfer to fast boats or small planes
Louise Kojak Garcia a former smuggler
who gave up this vocation voluntarily to
become a DEA informant testified that by
dividing a load of drugs among ten fast
boats coming from the Bahamas he could
limit the risk of enter
addiction to a fraction of the total
load customs he said would be forced to
choose which of the ten boats to
intercept
they simply lacked the men and equipment
to stop all ten the witnesses agreed
that the US Customs Service and the
Coast Guard could not possibly check the
thousands of boats and planes traveling
regularly between the Bahamas and the
United States while the geography of the
Bahamas is ideal for smuggling and
inadequate law enforcement resources
assure traffickers of being able to move
significant quantities of drugs to the
United States cooperation from Bahamian
officials to protect their operations
from interference has been essential
typically traffickers have bribed local
Bahamian customs officials and police
and have hired locals to unload and
reload drug cargos when their operations
grew in size the payoffs demanded from
Bahamian officials grew larger and
involved higher ranking members of
government Luis Garcia a major smuggler
of marijuana who became a DEA informant
in 1983 testified quote I was heavily
involved in smuggling drugs into the
United States for almost four years
beginning in early 1979 at that time I
supervised Daan operation which smuggled
tons of drugs mainly from Colombia and
Jamaica by way of the Bahamas with
complete impunity that was accomplished
by paying for protection to the Bahamian
authorities from the lowest ranking
officer to the highest politicians and
officers it is believed that if it was
not for this fact my smuggling
activities and those of many others like
me would not have been so successful end
quote
Garcia said payoffs were essential
corruption he said began with Airport
and customs inspectors but continued to
higher-level appointed Bahamian
officials Garcia said he had never paid
bribes to Bahamian elected officials
according to
see a a typical shipment of 6,000 to
8,000 pounds of marijuana cost 130 to
150 thousand dollars in bribes to
Bahamian officials most of that went to
police immigration and custom officials
among those bribed were the chief of the
Bahamian Drug Task Force and Garcia said
he had on his payroll and a former
chairman of the PLP the ruling party in
the Bahamas official payoffs Garcia
estimated were about fifteen percent of
the total cost of a marijuana shipment
in the early 1980s the bribes ensured
the smugglers a sanctuary from US
patrols as Garcia testified quote if
somebody is chasing you up there 30
miles out in the ocean and you see them
coming you can turn around and head back
into the islands and of course you are
paying for protection they are going to
protect you if you pay you won't get
arrested and quote growth of official
corruption with vesco and Bannister in
1972 Robert Vesco fled the United States
having been accused by law-enforcement
authorities of looting 240 million
dollars from the overseas investors
services mutual fund upon leaving the
u.s. vesko established operations in the
Bahamas developing a relationship with a
political fixer named Everett Bannister
it was close to prime minister pending
in time
vesko gave Bannister carte blanche at
the Bahamas Commonwealth Bank Bannister
and pending in return provided vesco
protection from extradition in part as a
result of his dual relationship with
vesco and pendulum Bannister became
increasingly influential in the Bahamas
and became known to many narcotics
traffickers as a man who could provide
protection to them quote from the top
end quote
Bannister
left the Bahamas in the 1940s and lived
for a number of years in New York before
returning as a consultant when the
pendulum government came to power in
1967 Bannister then devoted his
attention to providing assistance to
clients as diverse as Resorts
International one of the Bahamas
principle gambling operations and to
Anastasio Somoza when he was a fugitive
from Nicaragua in the latter case
Bannister reportedly received $320,000
in cash from Somoza to buy him a safe
haven according to his son Gorman
Bannister his father said most of the
money was paid to the man
Gorman understood that to mean the money
went to prime minister pending Everett
Bannister assisted drug traffickers in a
number of ways
he had them removed from the official
stop lists making it possible for
traffickers to enter and leave the
country without official interference
and warned them of impending drug raids
use of Norman's cave for smuggling
beyond his influence with high
government officials through the
involvement in the Bahamas Commonwealth
Bank a second consequence of Robert
Vesco --zz activities in the Bahamas was
the arrival of Colombian cocaine
traffickers vesko had left the Bahamas
in 1972 after the bank failed and US
pressure to extradite him grew but he
returned in 1978 after establishing a
relationship with the Colombian drug
dealer carlos lehder later and vesco
became regular companions on the islands
and laid heir decided to use the bahamas
as his base for smuggling cocaine to the
United States in 1978 laid air bought
most of Norman's Cay one of the Exuma
islands 50 miles from Nassau by the end
of the year Norman's Cay was home to a
group of some 40 laid Air employees who
drove the other residents and itinerant
visitors away from the island at
gunpoint laid air built
large hangar which had cocaine storage
facilities inside and was using the
island as a transshipment and
distribution point for cocaine coming
into the United States
laterz behavior led a number of US
property owners on the island to protest
the confiscation of their property to
the US Embassy in Nassau in July 1979
one of the Americans professor richard
novak delivered records of the drug
flights supported by photographs and
movies to the then american chargee
d'affaires
Antipas after meeting with Antipas and
the DEA officers stationed in Nassau
Novak returned to the island by small
plane accompanied by his son to collect
his belongings without Novak's knowledge
laid heir had learned of his visit to
the embassy and his complaints about the
cocaine operation
laterz associates surrounded the plane
when it returned smashed the radios
drained most of the fuel and then forced
novak and his son to reboard and take
off at night novak and his son survived
the resulting crash at the end of august
1979 under intense pressure from the US
Embassy a police raid on Norman's Cay
was scheduled for reasons never fully
explained by the Bohemians it was
postponed for 15 days when the raid
finally took place it was apparent that
during the intervening 15 days later had
been warned and the island had been
cleaned up as the police raid began laid
air managed to destroy what little
cocaine was left on the island and
although he was arrested he was released
immediately
the major victim of the raid was a
competitor of late eros a smuggler named
Ward who was also using Norman's Cay as
a result of the raid Ward was arrested
put on the Bahamian government's top
list and forced to move his smuggling
operation to Haiti despite two more
raids on the
Island about which lay dare also
received advance warning the smuggling
operation on Norman's cake continued
without interference and in fact became
even more outrageous laid air then began
a public campaign against police
harassment and u.s. imperialism during
the 1982 celebration of bohemian
independence laid air flew his light
plane over the nassau park where the
festivities were taking place and
dropped leaflets saying DEA go home many
of the leaflets had $100 bills stapled
to them these leaflets showered on the
heads of the Prime Minister and US
chargee d'affaires
to pass the subcommittee received
testimony from Gorman Bannister that his
father
Everett Bannister was the person who had
tipped laid air off to the impending
drug rates as Bannister testified quote
Senator Kerry did your father warned
carlos lehder of the police raid on
Norman's Cay mr. Bannister yes senator
Kerry do you want to describe that mr.
Bannister well as I recall he just made
a phone call to Carlos letting him know
well police are going to Senator Kerry
you heard the phone call mr. Bannister
oh yes yes yes yes I know my father did
call him one time and told him listen
the police are going to raid Norman's
Cay on a certain day clean it up and
when they went there they didn't find
anything
end quote when an opposition member of
the Bahamian Parliament norman solomon
began to complain to Bahamian and US
authorities about the situation
involving leaders use of Norman's Cay
for narcotics trafficking his house and
car were blown up according to Gorman
Bannister later boasted to him and to
his father that he was behind the
bombing because he didn't like Salomon
depicting laid airs Colombian employees
in the drug trade as
animals Bannister testified that his
father viewed laterz decision to bomb
Solomon as appropriate Everett Bannister
was indicted in the Southern District of
Florida in March 1989 on narcotics
charges following testimony before the
grand jury by his son Gorman
responds by United States too late air
problem a subcommittee staff review of
the pertinent cable traffic from the
embassy during the relevant period shows
that the u.s. embassy continuously
protested to the Bahamian government
about the norman's cay problem and
routinely cabled washington about the
scope of the problem in the early 1980s
these cables led to a 1982 meeting
between Vice President Bush Admiral
Daniel Murphy and Bahamian Prime
Minister pending at which the norman's
cay problem was raised the vice
president chastised the Prime Minister
for what was taking place during the
meeting
Prime Minister pending was shown a
computer printout of c-5 a surveillance
of Norman's Cay and was told that the
island resembled O'Hare Airport because
of its activity despite this
confrontation there was no follow-up by
the United States instead with the
appointment of a new ambassador United
States Bahamian relations focused on
base rights negotiations and the drug
issue was relegated to a much lower
priority the new ambassador loved
O'Brien Suki stated publicly that in his
view the most important issue in the
United States Bahamian relations was the
negotiation of base rights for the
United States law enforcement agencies
and prosecutors in South Florida noted
the policy shift these officials were
attempting to obtain State Department
cooperation for sting operations aimed
at Bahamian officials and for their
efforts to extradite traffickers from
the Bahamas these actions were met with
indifference and in some cases hostile
from the Ambassador on September 5th
1983 NBC Nightly News exposed the
normans k scandal and directly accused
the Bahamian government of complicity in
allowing laid airs operations to
continue the NBC broadcast and the
resulting outcry in the Bahamas led to
the establishment of a Royal Commission
of Inquiry to probe drug trafficking and
drug related corruption in the Bahamas
the inquiry report led to the
resignation of two cabinet officials and
the prosecution but later acquittal of
some police officials the operation on
Norman's Cay came to an end and later
returned to Colombia none of these
events changed the role of the Bahamas
as a major transit point for cocaine
traffickers or diminished the corruption
within the Bahamian government
subcommittee hearings on the issue and a
debate on D certification of the Bahamas
for failure fully to cooperate with the
United States on drug enforcement issues
generated renewed concern and narcotics
again became a major priority of the
embassy extent of Bahamian corruption
today the State Department's annual
report on International Narcotics
Control D tells the degree to which
corruption remains today an essential
element of the Bahamas status as a major
drug transit country according to the
1988 report the Bahamas still is
experiencing quote systemic corruption
which continues to make the Bahamas
attractive to drug traffickers end quote
the report notes that investigations
into official corruption appeared to be
limited to low-level enforcement
officers and failed to deal at all with
higher-level corruption even when
corruption is found suspected law
enforcement or military personnel are
not normally charged or tried in court
for their offenses instead they are
merely
forced to retire other evidence of the
continuing problem with official
corruption in the Bahamas is the reen
ama nation of George Smith and Kendal
Nottage for parliamentary seats by the
progressive Liberal Party both won their
seats despite the fact that they were
identified in the 1984 commission of
inquiry report as being involved in
narcotics related corruption Nottage was
indicted March 29th 1989 by a boston
federal grand jury on narcotics
money-laundering charges
although the Bahamian government passed
a comprehensive drug law in January 1987
which includes a provision for the quote
retroactive confiscation of narcotics
derived assets
end quote no arrests or prosecutions
under the new Act took place in the year
following its enactment in 1988 only one
person a Bahamian policeman was
convicted under this provision the March
1989 report stated that quote narcotics
related corruption continues to be a
problem making the country attractive to
drug traffickers end quote
similarly extradition of drug
traffickers remains a serious problem
the United States has for more than
three years sought extradition of Nigel
BOE a Bahamian lawyer with strong ties
to the PLP and the Bahamian government
to date the Bohemians continued to stall
his extradition the Bahamian response to
the US on the bow extradition issue has
been inadequate at best but hey mian
officials argue that beau is a rich man
and using the best legal talent in the
country to delay extradition what that
explanation fails to address is the
question of why the Bohemians themselves
have not investigated Bo's activities US
law enforcement authorities believe beau
has played a key role in organizing
smuggling throughout the Caribbean a
matter which should be of some interest
to the
heymy and authorities if they are indeed
concerned with cooperating with the US
and the war on drugs nevertheless the
United States has continued to certify
the Bahamas as providing full
cooperation in fighting the war on drugs
the United States has done so on the
ground that the Bahamas has taken
adequate steps on its own to control
drug production trafficking and money
laundering Assistant Secretary of State
for narcotics matters Barbara Ann
wrblewski testified that the baseline
issue in determining whether to certify
a country was whether there is quote
corruption to such an extent that it has
gotten in the way of cooperation and
quote the record developed by the
subcommittee as well as the State
Department's own International Narcotics
Control strategy report document that
corruption in the Bahamas continues to
be the major obstacle to cooperation
Bahamas seeks to influence US
policymakers in 1985 the increased
public attention to the role of the
Bahamas as a base for drug smuggling led
that government to seek the advice of a
US public relations firm the firm Black
Manta fort and ston submitted a
memorandum to the Bahamian officials
suggesting that it could sell the United
States government on the importance of
the Bahamas to u.s. security in that
memorandum Black Manta fort suggested
that public attention be focused on the
demand side of the drug issue
thus diverting attention from the
narcotics related problems on the
islands the Black Manta fort principal
assigned to the matter Mathew Friedman
was a former senior State Department
official who had handled narcotics
issues shortly after the 1984 u.s.
election Black Manta Ford advised the
Bahamian government that quote
perception by official Washington will
frequently drive the realities which
will affect policy decisions in this
regard the government of the Bahamas is
operating
charged atmosphere end quote
according to black mana fort the
Department of State and the Department
of Defense wished to maintain a solid
relationship with the pendulum
administration but the DEA and the
Department of the Treasury were active
critics according to the memorandum
political critics of the pendulum
government had been quote sowing the
seeds that the government of the Bahamas
is a nation for sale inviting drug czars
to use the banking system that
government officials are participating
in the drug trafficking that the
pendulum administration is about to
collapse and much more end quote Black
Manta fort advised the Bahamian
government that it needed to lobby both
the executive and congressional branches
of the United States government
beginning with the National Security
Council to mobilize political support
for the Bahamas and to focus the
department's of Defense and state so as
to quote effect Treasury and justice
policy end quote
the memo went on to suggest that the
personal relationships between then
Secretary of Defense Weinberger and then
attorney general Meese can be used to
redefine the priorities of the u.s. in
its dealings with the Bahamas Black
Manta fort was to charge the Bahamas
eight hundred thousand dollars per year
for representing them on these matters
and the firm was ultimately retained by
the Bahamian government in addition a
former coordinator of the South Florida
Drug Task Force
Admiral Daniel Murphy who participated
in a previously mentioned 1982 meeting
with Prime Minister pending testified
that he solicited the Bahamas as a
client for his consulting firm gray and
company he was unsuccessful the role of
the US consultants raises troubling
questions about conflict of interest
narcotics issues are indeed national
security issues the subcommittee
believes it is not in the interest of
the United States to have former
government officials whether from the
Congress or the executive branch who
held policy positions dealing with
narcotics law enforcement to use the
knowledge they have obtained to work for
a foreign government whose officials are
implicated either directly or indirectly
in the drug trade
Bahamian cooperation shortly after the
Bahamian government retained US public
relations consultants it suddenly began
cooperating on some drug issues on the
advice of its consultants for instance
the government allowed the installation
of an aerostat radar set up joint air
and naval operations and allowed US
authorities to enter Bahamian territory
in hot pursuit of drug traffickers yet
the cooperation remained far from
complete for example the government
continued to allow foreign nationals
arrested for drug smuggling to leave the
country after bail and continued to make
it difficult for US authorities to
participate in the destruction of seized
drugs the Bahamian willingness to
cooperate with interdiction efforts has
created a pro Bahamian constituency in
interdiction related agencies such as
the Customs Service but the increased
level of interdiction cooperation has
neither cut the amount of cocaine coming
into the United States from the Bahamas
nor has it led to the destruction of the
major smuggling organizations indeed as
Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for
enter u.s. Affairs Richard hull will
noted quote notwithstanding the
cooperation there has been an increase
in trafficking end quote
the Assistant Secretary of State for
international narcotics matters and the
administrator of the DEA acknowledged
that the Bahamas remains a significant
transshipment point conclusions the case
of the Bahamas illustrates many of the
failings of United States foreign policy
as it relates to narcotics one policy
was made at the embassy level with
little apparent interagency coordination
when ambassador's changed and US
anti-drug efforts in connection with the
Bahamas diminished they decreased
attention to the problem went largely
unnoticed in Washington - there was not
any coordinated follow-up to strong
initiatives the vice president's meeting
with Prime Minister pendulum was
followed by a four year hiatus before
significant pressure was exerted on the
Bahamian government relative to the drug
issue three the administration did not
regard the embassy in the Bahamas as an
important post because of the country's
location size and political system mr.
George
Antipas remained as the charge for more
than two years before a new ambassador
was appointed his replacement had little
experience in Caribbean affairs and did
not exhibit any feeling for the
importance of the drug issue the current
ambassador has demonstrated an
understanding of the drug issue and has
elevated this issue to the top of the US
Bahamian bilateral agenda for there was
little or no direct coordination between
the US Attorney's in Florida and the
embassy in Nassau the lack of
coordination led law enforcement
officials to believe that there was
little point in pursuing cases against
Bahamian citizens or government
officials because they would get little
support from the State Department on
extradition or operational matters today
some of these factors have changed the
US government appears to have recognized
the significance of the threat posed by
the continued use of the Bahamas as the
most significant transit point for
illegal drugs coming in to the United
States there are some areas such as in
the arrest and deportation of drug
traffickers found smuggling through
preclearance procedures in which the
Bahamian government is now cooperating
with the u.s. yet the Bahamas continues
to be the major transit point for
cocaine and marijuana coming into the
u.s. even though laws have been enacted
to allow seizure of drug related assets
no such seizures have taken place few if
any drug traffickers arrested in the
Bahamas are convicted and jailed the
result suggests to many that the
government of the Bahamas is not sincere
but engaged in a rather cynical exercise
to placate the United States for this
reason one of the most important issues
in United States Bahamian drug
cooperation is extradition especially if
persons indicted in the United States
who have alleged ties to Bahamian
government officials in the past the US
Customs Service has expressed some
concern over the granting of
preclearance privileges to other
countries customs officials have argued
that the United States stands to lose
control over the disposition of
individuals charged with crimes and
arrested in a foreign country with which
we have such agreements particularly if
there have been historical problems
associated with extradition customs has
expressed the concern that some
individuals who otherwise would have
been arrested upon reaching the u.s. may
escape punishment following an arrest in
such a country the State Department has
argued however that preclearance can
serve the useful purpose of alerting US
law enforcement authorities that an
individual charged with crimes will be
entering the US on a specific date time
and place this advanced intelligence can
be used to ensure that arrests are made
once the individual reaches his or her
destination in the United States the
preclearance agreement with the United
States is very important to the Bahamian
tourist industry the subcommittee
believes that a thorough review needs to
be undertaken regarding this agreement
to determine whether on the whole it has
reduced the flow of narcotics to the
United States from the Bahamas or has
allowed narcotics traffickers to escape
punishment if the benefits do not
outweigh the costs the US should
announce our intent to terminate this
agreement within one year unless
substantial progress is made in
resolving these problems
in addition the subcommittee believes
the president should retain as an
optional sanction the ability to
terminate any nation that has customs
preclearance if it is determined the
nation does not fully cooperate with the
u.s. in the war on drugs appendix denial
of requests for declassification in this
chapter there are five references to
news media reports on the Bahamas which
are used to document the role of the
Bahamas and the narcotics trade on
December 1st 1988 senator Claiborne Pell
chairman of the Committee on Foreign
Relations wrote the Department of State
requesting the declassification of 11 US
government documents which corroborate
these news accounts on December 27 1988
chairman Pell was notified in writing by
the Department of State that the
declassification request had been denied
the one document which the State
Department did not object to
declassifying was a September 5th 1983
transcript found in their files of an
NBC Nightly News program entitled the
Navy and the Bahamas the subcommittee
believes strongly that disclosure of all
eleven documents is in the public
interest to facilitate public
understanding of official responses to
the war on drugs the State Department
response of December 27th 1988 and the
September 5th 1983 NBC transcript are
included as appendices at the end of
this section u.s. Department of State
Washington DC December 27th 1988
honorable Claiborne Pell chairman
Committee on Foreign Relations u.s.
Senate Washington DC dear mr. Chairman I
am replying to the request to the
Department of December 1st 1988 that it
review for declassification 11 documents
which were transmitted at that time
concurrently the department was
requested to retrieve an additional
document from its files and to
view it also forward declassification
after careful review and consideration
we find that we have no objection to the
declassification and release of document
number one we have no objection to the
release and part of documents numbers 7
10 and 11 those portions that must be
withheld are bracketed in ink in all
cases where material has been excised
the relevant subsections of executive
order 1 2 3 5 6 section 1.3 a 3 and 5
are noted in the margin we believe that
despite the passage of time the
premature disclosure of this material
would have an adverse effect on
sensitive issues in United States
relations with the Bahamas it contains
foreign government information provided
in confidence and confidential US
government assessment and
recommendations documents numbers 2 3 4
5 6 & 8 must be withheld in full
documents numbers 2 4 5 6 & 8 are
essentially comprised of sensitive
material the disclosure of which could
adversely affect our bilateral relations
with the government of the Bahamas these
documents contain foreign government
information provided in confidence as
well as confidential US assessment and
recommendations in addition document
number 3 wholly and documents number 5 &
6 concurrently are comprised of
deliberative material which must be
withheld under Section B 5 of the
Freedom of Information Act title 5 USC
Section 5 v 2 as comprising interagency
or intra-agency communications exempt
from disclosure under the deliberative
process or similar privilege we believe
that the Department of Justice has
significant equities in two documents
numbers 9 and 12 which we believe
contains sensitive material the
disclosure of which could be injurious
to our relations with the Bahamas as
these documents contain foreign
government information provided in
confidence as well as confidential US
government assessment
therefore the Department of Justice
should be asked to review this material
we have written the relevant subsections
of EEO one two three five six section
one point three a three and five and the
margin adjacent to the sensitive
material I understand that officers of
the department are in direct contact
with your staff concerning this review
alternatively if you have any further
questions please contact mr. Frederick
Smith jr. of our Bureau of
administration on six four seven two 207
with best wishes
sincerely J Edward Fox assistant
secretary legislative affairs enclosures
documents numbers one through twelve
memorandum to Department of Defense
attention miss helen young program NBC
Nightly News wrc-tv NBC network date
September 5th 1983 7:00 p.m. Washington
DC subject the Navy and Bahamas Tom
Brokaw Robert Vesco is Americans most
notorious fugitive for years
law enforcement officials have been
trying to nail him on a variety of
charges
most of them related to the
disappearance of millions of dollars
from a company that vesco controlled
tonight in this special segment Brian
Ross describes how vesco continues to
live his life on the lam in luxury now
in the Bahamas where the vesco
connection is powerful and illegal Brian
Ross for more than four years now
this beautiful seldom visited island in
the Bahamas just 200 miles from the
Florida coast has been the base for one
of the biggest drug smuggling operations
in the world the island is called
Norman's Cay and here in the middle of
nowhere a
Smuggler's dream refrigerated hangars
store tons and tons of cocaine and
$1,000,000 paved runway long enough to
handle jet planes this is the man who
dreamed the smugglers dream the man at
the top of the normans k smuggling
operation Robert Vesco
the accused Wall Street master swindler
who fled the United States ten years ago
and is now said to have made millions of
dollars in the drug business in the
Bahamas since the late 70s when these
pictures were taken man he roams the
streets freely usually with not more
than two bodyguards Ross this Florida
drug agent worked undercover in the
Bahamas man mr vesco was involved very
heavily in the cocaine traffic he was a
major financier he provided some of the
muscle protection for different groups
of smugglers and that his the majority
of his empire was being held together by
money that he was making from narcotics
smuggling Ross federal agents have been
following the vesco drug business for at
least two years
this seized freighter is just one of
dozens of boats and airplanes that
agents say Vesco has used to smuggle
cocaine and marijuana into the United
States authorities save ESCOs Colombian
cocaine supplier is this man carlos
lehder like vesco a fugitive from
american justice but federal authorities
say that even with all they know about
vests COEs drug business the ships his
Colombian connection his Island drug
bust even knowing all that they haven't
been able to stop him second man
law-abiding Christians crowd reaction
Ross American authorities say vesco is
just too well protected in the Bahamas
by some of the leaders of the ruling
party the PLP the progressive Liberal
Party a Justice Department intelligence
report says a vesco associate has been
quote allegedly paying approximately
$100,000 per
month in Bahamian officials including
Prime Minister and quote mr. Prime
Minister can we talk to you
Prime Minister Lyndon pending declined
to be interviewed by NBC News about
allegations of corruption in his
government in public as at this rally
last week some of the very Bahamian
officials suspected of being involved in
drug corruption with vesco and others
speak boldly against drugs third man I
say crime and drugs is frustrating our
positive image in the country Ross this
is Kendall Nottage a member of the
Bahamian Parliament and a cabinet
minister NBC News has learned that this
summer
the FBI was actually making plans to try
to arrest Nottage as part of a big
federal effort to crack down on the drug
business the plan was like Abscam to get
Nottage on a private yacht just outside
Bahamian waters to get him to take a
bribe with hidden cameras rolling but
the plan was blocked at the American
Embassy in Nassau ambassador lev e
debris on ski i've stopped it
raus united states ambassador lived over
in Suki says one of the reasons he
stopped the FBI investigation was that
it might upset delicate negotiations
with the Bohemians over a US Navy
submarine testing base in the Bahamas
ambassador debris on ski this could be
very embarrassing it could naturally
would be and it could be very
destabilizing when you look at the total
picture I mean our relations with the
Bahamas is not solely in the drug area
there are many other things which over
the long pole will be more important
than the drug Ross federal authorities
say 70 percent of the cocaine and
marijuana coming into this country is
coming through the Bahamas fourth man
South Florida is not rid of all of it
yet not as long as we have the Bahamas
over there Ross
police in Florida are making dozens of
drug arrests every day but the supply of
cocaine hasn't got down it's gone up and
it's gone up because of the wide open
operation of drug bases like this one on
Norman's Cay run by American fugitive
Robert Vesco said to be protected by
Bahamian officials and tolerated by
American diplomats more concerned with
the Navy bases in the Bahamas than drug
bases in the Bahamas Brian Ross NBC News
in the Bahamas
[Music]
this is our hidden history
you